[Agent Builder] Document trace collection (9.5) (#7322)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/ai-features/agent-builder/collect-traces.md

---
navigation_title: "Collect agent traces"
description: "Learn how Agent Builder collects agent execution traces into OpenTelemetry data streams in your Elasticsearch deployment, how to configure collection and privacy, and how to grant access."
applies_to:
  stack: ga 9.5+
  serverless: ga
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
  - id: kibana
  - id: observability
  - id: security
  - id: cloud-serverless
---

# Collect {{agent-builder}} traces

{{agent-builder}} can collect agent execution traces into your {{es}} deployment. Traces record how each agent round runs, including model calls, tool calls, latency, and token usage, so you can monitor agent activity, debug behavior, and build dashboards on the data.

## How trace collection works

When an agent runs, {{agent-builder}} records the run as OpenTelemetry (OTel) traces. Each trace covers one conversation round. A trace is made up of spans that map to the work the agent did, such as model calls and tool calls.

> {{agent-builder}} ingests this data into managed OpenTelemetry data streams in your {{es}} deployment. Execution spans, such as model calls and tool calls, are stored in `traces-agent_builder.otel-*`, with their timings, token usage, model, and status. Trace data is also stored in `logs-agent_builder.otel-*`, so reading all of it requires read access to both patterns.

Reviewer: I think it would make sense here first to say that trace data stream is meant to be space aware and that using the wildcard _could_ be used to query all spaces

Author: Thanks Meghan, good call. I moved the space-aware explanation up front. Let me know if it reads better. 🙂  https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7322/changes#diff-ff9c0d2345cdd43e2db32fbc97931232a07d71eaf06f7897181f3e89e1951b66R23

To change what is captured, expand **Advanced privacy settings** in the **Agent Builder Traces** section. Each option is off by default.

:::{image} images/agent-builder-traces-privacy-settings.png
:screenshot:
:alt: The expanded Advanced privacy settings, showing six toggles for including sensitive content in traces, all turned off
:::

| Setting | Effect when enabled |
|---|---|
| **Include user prompts in traces** | Captures user messages. |
| **Include LLM responses in traces** | Captures agent responses. |
| **Include tool call details in traces** | Captures tool call arguments and results. |
| **Include system prompt in traces** | Captures agent instructions. |
| **Include real tool and agent names in traces** | Records real tool and agent names instead of anonymized values. |
| **Include real conversation and workflow IDs in traces** | Records real conversation and workflow IDs instead of anonymized values. |

:::{note}
Built-in tools and agents always appear under their real names. When a value is anonymized, {{agent-builder}} uses a stable identifier, so you can still group and correlate traces without exposing names or IDs.
:::

## Grant access to trace data

> Trace data is stored in the `traces-agent_builder.otel-*` data stream. To read it, a role needs `read` and `view_index_metadata` on that pattern.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Trace data is stored in the ` traces-agent_builder.otel-*` and `logs-agent_builder.otel-*` data streams. To read it, a role needs `read` and `view_index_metadata` on that pattern.
```

---
navigation_title: "Collect agent traces"
description: "Learn how Agent Builder collects agent execution traces into OpenTelemetry data streams in your Elasticsearch deployment, how to configure collection and privacy, and how to grant access."
applies_to:
  stack: ga 9.5+
  serverless: ga
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
  - id: kibana
  - id: observability
  - id: security
  - id: cloud-serverless
---

# Collect {{agent-builder}} traces

{{agent-builder}} can collect agent execution traces into your {{es}} deployment. Traces record how each agent round runs, including model calls, tool calls, latency, and token usage, so you can monitor agent activity, debug behavior, and build dashboards on the data.

## How trace collection works

> When an agent runs, {{agent-builder}} records the run as OpenTelemetry (OTel) traces. Each trace covers one conversation round. A trace is made up of spans that map to the work the agent did, such as model calls, tool calls, and any workflows it triggered.

Reviewer 2: I would avoid mentioning "workflows" here so it doesn't raise more questions about how to make agent builder call a workflow.

{{agent-builder}} ingests this data into managed data streams in your {{es}} deployment. It uses two OpenTelemetry data streams:

- `traces-agent_builder.otel-*` holds the execution spans, such as model calls and tool calls, with their timings, token usage, model, and status.

> - `logs-agent_builder.otel-*` holds the conversation content you opt into capturing, such as user prompts, agent responses, system prompts, and tool call details, recorded as OpenTelemetry log records. Content is captured only when you enable it in [Trace privacy settings](#trace-privacy-settings).

Reviewer 2: These recent [PR](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/277640) has moved these data from the logs data stream  to traces one. Please take it into consideration and update the sentence.

Reviewer 2: This "holds the conversation content you opt into capturing" and "Content is captured only when you enable it in" might make the user belive that the data stream `logs-agent_builder.otel-*` is only populated when the privacy settings, which isn't the case.

Author: You're right, and thanks for the [#277640](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/277640) pointer.
I've rewritten the section around the single traces-* stream and dropped logs-* everywhere, including the read privileges.
FYI: the Kibana UI still shows both `traces-agent_builder.otel-*` and `logs-agent_builder.otel-*`, in the Trace access and storage box on the Agent Builder Traces settings page.
Looks stale after your PR, so flagging it:
<img width="994" height="327" alt="Screenshot 2026-07-16 at 18 28 11" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/de67c6bc-a0b8-4ed9-af34-20c6ce849c64" />

Both are OTel-compatible and use the standard OTel index templates, so they inherit the mappings, settings, and data lifecycle that {{es}} maintains for OTel data.

These are regular data streams, not system or hidden indices. You can explore and analyze the data with the same tools you use for any other data in {{es}}, including [Discover](/explore-analyze/discover.md), [Dashboards](/explore-analyze/dashboards.md), [Lens](/explore-analyze/visualize/lens.md), and [ES|QL](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md).

Trace collection is space-aware. Each {{kib}} space collects its own traces.

### What a trace contains

Each trace is a set of spans that follow a run from the overall conversation round down to its individual steps, including:

- Each agent execution.
- Each model call.
- Each tool call.

> - Each workflow the agent runs.

Reviewer 2: I would avoid mentioning workflows here too

> Spans follow OpenTelemetry semantic conventions and carry generative AI attributes for the model, the provider, and token usage. Use them to break down usage and latency by model, agent, or tool. For the exact fields and the prebuilt visualizations that use them, refer to [Build dashboards on trace data](#build-dashboards-on-trace-data).

Reviewer 2: I am not sure which is the policy for external links, but this github repo has the documentation for oTel traces:   [OpenTelemetry GenAI Semantic Conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions-genai)

Author: Added, thanks.

For the full privilege model, including {{kib}} feature and cluster privileges, refer to [Permissions and access control](permissions.md#read-trace-data).

## Export traces to a remote OTLP endpoint
```{applies_to}
stack: ga 9.5+
```

By default, {{agent-builder}} exports traces to the local data streams in your {{es}}. You can also forward traces to one or more remote OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) endpoints, such as a dedicated observability cluster.

Configure remote endpoints with `xpack.agentBuilder.tracing.exporters` in `kibana.yml`. Each entry takes a `url` and optional `headers` for authentication:

```yaml
xpack.agentBuilder.tracing:
  exporters:
    - url: "https://remote-cluster:9200/_otlp/v1/traces"
      headers:
        Authorization: "ApiKey <encoded-key>"
```

Remote export is additive. Traces still go to the local `traces-agent_builder.otel-*` and `logs-agent_builder.otel-*` data streams, and a copy is sent to each configured endpoint. The [trace privacy settings](#trace-privacy-settings) apply to every destination, so content that is excluded locally is also excluded from remote export.

:::{note}

> Remote export is set in `kibana.yml`, so it is available only on deployments where you can edit the {{kib}} configuration, such as self-managed clusters. It is not available on serverless projects, which do not expose `kibana.yml`.

Reviewer 2: I wasn't expecting that we would add `xpack.agentBuilder.tracing` to the documentation. That is ok but you are advising them to ship the traces directly into the Elasticsearch OTLP/HTTP endpoint. And that is not the Elastic best practice. I actually don't know which one is the "right" way but I know that there are many:
[Elasticsearch OTLP/HTTP endpoint](https://www.elastic.co/docs/manage-data/ingest/otlp-endpoint)
[Elastic Cloud Managed OTLP Endpoint (mOTLP)](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/opentelemetry/managed-inputs/managed-otlp-endpoint)
[Send data from an upstream OpenTelemetry Collector](https://www.elastic.co/docs/solutions/observability/get-started/opentelemetry/use-cases/upstream-collector)
[Default configuration of the EDOT Collector](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/edot-collector/config/default-config-standalone)

I would assume the "right" way is probably mOTLP or the edot collector.

Author: Thanks. Digging in further, this is internal/experimental config rather than a supported, documented setting (it isn't in the Kibana settings reference), so I've left it out for 9.5. Happy to add it back if you think we need it, just point me at the recommended setup. 🙂

:::

## Build dashboards on trace data

When trace collection is on, {{agent-builder}} provides a prebuilt overview dashboard for agent activity and token usage. You install or reinstall it per space from the **Agent Builder Traces** settings section. For what each panel shows and the full span and attribute reference, refer to Agent Builder traces overview dashboard.
% TODO add link: [Agent Builder traces overview dashboard](TODO).

Because traces are stored in regular data streams, you can also build your own visualizations with [Dashboards](/explore-analyze/dashboards.md) and [Lens](/explore-analyze/visualize/lens.md), or query the data with [ES|QL](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md). To explore traces in natural language, use the [built-in traces skill](builtin-skills-reference.md).

## View traces for a conversation round

> In [Agent Chat](chat.md), you can open the trace waterfall for a single conversation round. The button appears only when the trace data stream exists, you have access to it, and traces exist for that round.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as before... I don't think this is accurate.
